Examples
********

This directory contains a curated set of examples for validating and exploring the main functionalities of **MHCXGraph**. Each example is driven by a JSON manifest file that defines the input structures, execution mode, selectors, and output path.

Directory structure
===================

.. code-block:: text

   examples/
   ├── EXAMPLES.rst
   ├── input
   │   ├── pre-renumbered
   │   └── renumbered
   ├── manifests
   │   ├── manifest-minimal.json
   │   ├── manifest-multiple.json
   │   ├── manifest-pairwise.json
   │   └── manifest-screening.json
   └── results

Overview
========

The core workflow of **MHCXGraph** is:

.. code-block:: text

   run  →  (optional) heatmap

Two main usage paths are available, depending on whether the analysis should be restricted to functionally relevant hotspot residues:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80

   * - Path
     - When to use

   * - **A**: ``run`` → ``heatmap``
     - General structural comparison without residue filtering.

   * - **B**: ``renumber`` → ``run`` (with selectors) → ``heatmap``
     - Analysis restricted to MHC hotspot residues. This requires IMGT-standardized numbering.

The ``renumber`` and ``heatmap`` commands are accessory modules. The ``renumber`` step is only required when using the predefined ``MHC1`` or ``MHC2`` selectors, as described in :ref:`hotspot_selectors_section`.

Core processing
===============

The ``run`` command is the main execution module of **MHCXGraph**. It is driven by a manifest file that defines the inputs, execution mode, and structural selectors. For a detailed description of the manifest structure and available configuration fields, see :ref:`manifest_section`.

.. warning::

   Input PDB files should not contain additional macromolecules, such as TCRs or antibodies, interacting with the MHC in a way that alters the exposure of surface residues. Their presence may affect relative solvent accessibility (RSA) calculations and graph connectivity, leading to inaccurate comparison results.

Pairwise mode
-------------

The ``pairwise`` mode performs an all-against-all comparison across the input dataset. Its main purpose is to quantify structural similarity between every possible pair of MHC structures.

.. code-block:: bash

   MHCXGraph run manifests/manifest-pairwise.json

Multiple mode
-------------

The ``multiple`` mode performs a simultaneous comparison of a group of structures in a single run. It is useful for identifying structural features shared across all inputs.

.. code-block:: bash

   MHCXGraph run manifests/manifest-multiple.json

Screening mode
--------------

The ``screening`` mode is optimized for one-against-many comparisons. It compares a reference structure against a directory of target structures in order to identify structural cross-reactive candidates.

.. code-block:: bash

   MHCXGraph run manifests/manifest-screening.json

Visualization with heatmap
==========================

After a pairwise run, **MHCXGraph** can generate a similarity heatmap with hierarchical clustering. The similarity metric is a coverage-based index defined as the fraction of unique nodes in association graph frames relative to the total number of nodes in both input graphs.

.. code-block:: bash

   MHCXGraph heatmap \
     -i results/pairwise/PAIRWISE/ \
     -o results/pairwise/ \
     -n similarity_heatmap.png

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   * - Flag
     - Description

   * - ``-i``
     - Input directory, corresponding to the ``PAIRWISE/`` folder generated by a pairwise run.

   * - ``-o``
     - Output directory for the heatmap image.

   * - ``-n``
     - Output file name.

.. note::

   This module requires the output of a completed pairwise run. Execute ``MHCXGraph run`` with a pairwise manifest before using ``MHCXGraph heatmap``.

Output files
------------

In addition to the ``.png`` figure, the heatmap module generates several data files that are useful for downstream analysis:

#. ``distance_matrix.csv``  
   Numerical representation of dissimilarity between every pair of proteins.

#. ``component_count_matrix.csv``  
   Number of connected components shared between each pair of proteins.

#. ``unique_nodes_graph_*.csv``  
   Detailed lists of residues involved in the shared nodes for each pairwise comparison.

.. _hotspot_selectors_section:

Using hotspot residue selectors
===============================

By default, **MHCXGraph** processes the full structure. If you want to restrict the analysis to functionally relevant residues, such as those lining the peptide-binding groove or participating in TCR contact, you can use the predefined ``MHC1`` or ``MHC2`` selectors in the manifest.

When using these selectors, you must first run ``renumber``. The residue indices in ``MHC1`` and ``MHC2`` follow the IMGT domain numbering scheme, so applying them to structures with non-standardized numbering may produce incorrect or incomplete results.

Step 1, standardize numbering
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

   MHCXGraph renumber \
     -i examples/input/pre-renumbered/ \
     -o examples/input/renumbered/ \
     -c mhci \
     --suffix _renumbered

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   * - Flag
     - Description

   * - ``-i``
     - Input directory containing the original structure files.

   * - ``-o``
     - Output directory for the renumbered files.

   * - ``-c``
     - Chain convention. Use ``mhci`` for MHC class I and ``mhcii`` for MHC class II.

   * - ``--suffix``
     - Suffix appended to each output file name.

Step 2, configure selectors in the manifest
-------------------------------------------

Two predefined hotspot residue sets are available.

``MHC1``
~~~~~~~~

Residues from MHC class I involved in peptide presentation and TCR recognition. This selector covers positions along the α1 and α2 helices and the floor of the peptide-binding groove, using IMGT numbering for chain ``A``.

.. code-block:: json

   "MHC1": {
     "chains": ["C"],
     "residues": {
       "A": [18, 19, 42, 43, 44, 54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66,
             68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 79, 80, 83, 84, 89, 108, 109,
             142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155,
             156, 157, 158, 159, 161, 162, 163, 165, 166, 167, 169, 170, 171]
     }
   }

``MHC2``
~~~~~~~~

Residues from MHC class II located at the peptide-binding interface, distributed across the α chain (chain ``A``) and β chain (chain ``B``).

.. code-block:: json

   "MHC2": {
     "chains": ["C"],
     "residues": {
       "A": [37, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 69],
       "B": [56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72,
             73, 74, 77, 78, 81]
     }
   }

.. note::

   Use ``MHC1`` for class I structures and ``MHC2`` for class II structures. Do not mix these selectors across incompatible chain organizations.

Step 3, run using the renumbered input
--------------------------------------

After renumbering, point the manifest to the renumbered directory and proceed normally:

.. code-block:: bash

   MHCXGraph run manifests/manifest-pairwise.json
